DOCS-11819-mqtt3-connector-final-kt (#1611)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: mqtt 3/1.0.0/modules/ROOT/pages/mqtt3-connector-client-id.adoc

= Set a Client ID with MQTT 3 Connector

Client IDs are important for MQTT because they identify a connection to an MQTT broker. Moreover, they identify a specific device or client,
and it can be useful in terms of traceability to set a client ID that clearly identifies a device's connection to the broker.

> MQTT brokers usually implement a mechanism that if a new connection request is received by the broker, and if that connection's client ID matches with an existing connection, the broker closes the old connection and accepts the new one. This mechanism is known as a client take-over. MQTT brokers employ this mechanism to prevent situations such as TCP connections reaching a half-open or invalid state due to a crash in one of the communication ends, which is undesirable. The broker assumes the new incoming connection to be valid, closes the older connection, and continues using the newly established connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT brokers usually implement a mechanism that closes an old connection if a new connection request with the same client ID as the existing (old) connection is received and then accepts the new connection. This mechanism is known as a client take-over. MQTT brokers employ this mechanism to prevent situations such as TCP connections reaching a half-open or invalid state due to a crash in one of the communication ends, which is undesirable. The broker assumes the new incoming connection to be valid, closes the older connection, and continues using the newly established connection.
```

> The client-takeover mechanism can become a problem if you want to deploy an application in a cluster, and still provide an explicit client ID that identifies the client. Anypoint Connector for MQTT 3 (MQTT 3 Connector) provides client ID generators that help you set a static client ID, set a client ID with a dynamic component to adjust to different deployment scenarios, or define your custom client ID generator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client take-over mechanism can become a problem if you want to deploy an application in a cluster and still provide an explicit client ID that identifies the client. Anypoint Connector for MQTT 3 (MQTT 3 Connector) provides client ID generators that help you set a static client ID, set a client ID with a dynamic component to adjust to different deployment scenarios, or define your custom client ID generator.
```

            <mqtt3:client-id-generator>
                <mqtt3:client-id-custom-expression-generator clientId="principality-123-" customClientIdSuffix="#[%dw 2.0 output text/plain --- now() as String {format: 'y-MM-dd'}]"/>
            </mqtt3:client-id-generator>
            <mqtt3:connection-options maxInFlight="60" cleanSession="true" />
        </mqtt3:form-connection>
    </mqtt3:config>
----

You can also specify an expression as a client ID. In the following example, dynamic configurations generate new connections for each new expression value:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
    <mqtt3:config name="MQTT_ClientID_Only_Expression_Suffix_Config">
        <mqtt3:form-connection username="aziraphale" password="principality" protocol="TCP" host="127.0.0.1" port="${mosquitto.port1}">
            <mqtt3:client-id-generator>
                <mqtt3:client-id-custom-expression-generator customClientIdSuffix="#['smart-bentley-' ++ randomInt(1000) as String]"/>
            </mqtt3:client-id-generator>
            <mqtt3:connection-options maxInFlight="60" cleanSession="true" />
        </mqtt3:form-connection>
    </mqtt3:config>
----

> In the following example, the configuration sets a simple string as the client ID, that generates a static client ID `principality-123`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the configuration sets a simple string as the client ID, which generates a static client ID `principality-123`:
```

. In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
. Click *OK*.
. In the *MQTT3 Config* window, for *Connection*, select *MQTT3 URL Connection*.
. For *Client id generator* select *Client id random suffix generator*.
. Set the following fields:
+
* *Client ID*: `smart-bentley-123`.
* *Username*: `mosquitto`.
* *Password*: `password`.
* *URL*: `tcp://127.0.0.1:${mosquitto.port1}`.
[start=7]
. Click *OK*.

.Client ID Random Suffix Generator configuration
image::mqtt3-random-generator.png[Client ID Random Suffix Generator configuration in Global Element Properties window]

In the XML editor, the `<<mqtt3:client-id-random-suffix-generator>` configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
    <mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Static_Prefix_And_Random_Suffix_Config">
        <mqtt3:connection username="mosquitto" password="password"  url="tcp://127.0.0.1:${mosquitto.port1}">
            <mqtt3:client-id-generator>
                <mqtt3:client-id-random-suffix-generator clientId="smart-bentley-123" />
            </mqtt3:client-id-generator>
            <mqtt3:connection-options maxInFlight="60" cleanSession="true"  />
        </mqtt3:connection>
    </mqtt3:config>
----

> You can also omit the client ID prefix, in which case, the generator assigns a random UUID as your client ID. In the following example, you configure the generator to generate a client ID similar to `0f321a85-fddf-429f-ba89-26d201db9777`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also omit the client ID prefix, in which case the generator assigns a random UUID as your client ID. In the following example, you configure the generator to generate a client ID similar to `0f321a85-fddf-429f-ba89-26d201db9777`:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
    <mqtt3:config name="MQTT_Static_Prefix_And_Random_Suffix_Config">
        <mqtt3:connection username="mosquitto" password="mosquitto"  url="tcp://127.0.0.1:${mosquitto.port1}">
            <mqtt3:client-id-generator>
                <mqtt3:client-id-random-suffix-generator />
            </mqtt3:client-id-generator>
            <mqtt3:connection-options maxInFlight="60" cleanSession="true"  />
        </mqtt3:connection>
    </mqtt3:config>
----

== Configure a Custom Client ID Generator

You might want to supply your own custom client ID generator. To do so, you must be familiar with the Mule SDK subtypes, and the import and export annotations.

In the following example, you configure your own client ID generator:

. Create your own Java connector project.

> . In the pom file of your connector project, add the MQTT 3 Connector as a dependency, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the pom file of your connector project, add MQTT 3 Connector as a dependency, for example:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>
    <groupId>org.example</groupId>
    <artifactId>mqtt3-extended-connector</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
    <packaging>mule-extension</packaging>
    <name>MQTT Extended Connector</name>

    <parent>
        <groupId>org.mule.extensions</groupId>
        <artifactId>mule-ee-core-modules-parent</artifactId>
    </parent>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectors</groupId>
            <artifactId>mule4-mqtt3-connector</artifactId>
            <version>1.0.0</version>
            <classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
----

[start=3]
. Create your connector's definition class, for example:
+
[source,java,linenums]
----
@Xml(prefix = "mqtt3-extended")
@Extension(name = "MQTT3Extended", category = SELECT)
public class MQTT3ExtendedConnector {
}
----

[start=4]

> . In your custom extension, define your implementation for the `ClientIDGenerator` interface, exposed by the MQTT Connector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In your custom extension, define your implementation for the `ClientIDGenerator` interface, exposed by MQTT 3 Connector:
```

+

> MQTT Connector exposes the `ClientIDGenerator` interface, which only requires that you implement the method `generateClientID()`. At this point you will need to import this interface, which is exported by the MQTT 3 Connector, using the `@Import` annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT 3 Connector exposes the `ClientIDGenerator` interface, which only requires that you implement the method `generateClientID()`. At this point, you must import this interface using the `@Import` annotation, which is then exported by MQTT 3 Connector.
```

+
[source,java,linenums]
----
@Xml(prefix = "mqtt3-extended")
@Extension(name = "MQTT3Extended", category = SELECT)
@Import(type = ClientIDGenerator.class)
public class MQTT3ExtendedConnector {

}
----

[start=5]
. Define an implementation for the `ClientIDGenerator` interface:
+

[source,java,linenums]
----
@Alias("custom-client-id")
public class MyClientIdGenerator implements ClientIDGenerator {

  /**
   * Client id to be used to identify the connection to the MQTT broker.
   */
  @Parameter
  @DisplayName("Client ID")
  @Optional(defaultValue = "")
  @Expression(NOT_SUPPORTED)
  @ClientId
  protected String clientId;

  private String suffix = "my-custom-suffix";

  /**
   * @return a client ID that results from concatenating the clientId and a randomly generated UUID string.
   */
  @Override
  public String generateClientID() {
    return clientId + (clientId.isEmpty() ? "" : "-") + suffix;
  }
}
----
[start=6]
. Define the subtype in your connector definition and export your custom implementation:
+

> To do so, make the previous defined implementation, available to the MQTT 3 Connector by defining your custom implementation as a `ClientIDGenerator` subtype in your connector class. Also export your `MyClientIdGenerator` class using the `@Export` annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, make the previously defined implementation available to MQTT 3 Connector by defining your custom implementation as a `ClientIDGenerator` subtype in your connector class. Also, export your `MyClientIdGenerator` class using the `@Export` annotation.
```

+
[source,java,linenums]
----
@Xml(prefix = "mqtt3-extended")
@Extension(name = "MQTT3Extended", category = SELECT)
@Import(type = ClientIDGenerator.class)
@Export(classes = {MyClientIdGenerator.class})
@SubTypeMapping(baseType = ClientIDGenerator.class, subTypes = {MyClientIdGenerator.class})
public class MQTT3ExtendedConnector {

}
----
+

> After you set up your custom connector project, you are ready to access the new implementation from your application using the MQTT 3 Connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you set up your custom connector project, you are ready to access the new implementation from your application using MQTT 3 Connector.
```

							<artifactId>org.eclipse.paho.client.mqttv3</artifactId>
						</sharedLibrary>
					</sharedLibraries>
				</configuration>
			</plugin>
		</plugins>
	</build>

	<dependencies>
		<dependency>
			<groupId>org.mule.connectors</groupId>
			<artifactId>mule-http-connector</artifactId>
			<version>1.5.25</version>
			<classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
		</dependency>
		<dependency>
			<groupId>org.mule.connectors</groupId>
			<artifactId>mule-sockets-connector</artifactId>
			<version>1.2.1</version>
			<classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
		</dependency>
		<dependency>
			<groupId>org.eclipse.paho</groupId>
			<artifactId>org.eclipse.paho.client.mqttv3</artifactId>
			<version>1.2.5</version>
		</dependency>
		<dependency>
		    <groupId>org.example</groupId>
		    <artifactId>mqtt3-extended-connector</artifactId>
		    <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
		    <classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
		</dependency>
		<dependency>
		    <groupId>com.mulesoft.connectors</groupId>
		    <artifactId>mule4-mqtt3-connector</artifactId>
		    <version>1.0.0</version>
		    <classifier>mule-plugin</classifier>
		</dependency>
	</dependencies>
</project>
----
+

> Now, if you try to create a new MQTT Connector configuration in your application, your custom client ID implementation should be in the list of available client ID generators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, if you try to create a new MQTT 3 Connector configuration in your application, your custom client ID implementation should be in the list of available client ID generators.
```

[start=8]

> . To use your custom ID generator in an MQTT Connector Configuration navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To use your custom ID generator in an MQTT 3 Connector configuration navigate to the *Global Elements* tab.
```

. Click *Create*.

> . In the filter box type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the filter box, type `mqtt` and select *MQTT3 Config*.
```
